Daytona Skill for Claude — Launch Brief

Summary

We built a Claude Skill for Daytona. The MCP server already gives Claude the tools;
the Skill gives it the know-how to use them — at roughly 100 tokens of context when
idle, versus a dozen tool definitions loaded into every conversation. It complements
the MCP server; it does not replace it.


What to present, in order

1. Positioning. Skills and MCP are layers, not competitors. "MCP is dead" is a myth —
   adoption is up and the protocol is now under the Linux Foundation — but its real
   flaw, upfront token bloat, is exactly what a Skill removes. Anthropic's own rule:
   explaining how to do something is a Skill; giving Claude access to something is MCP.
   We keep the MCP server and add the expertise layer on top. (Diagram: blog/diagram/cake.png.)

2. Strategic fit. The industry is shifting from "call MCP tools" to "let the agent run
   code" — an approach Anthropic says requires a secure sandbox, which is what Daytona
   sells.

3. Proof. Tested end to end against live Daytona. A fresh Claude agent, given a plain
   task without naming the skill, auto-triggered it, created a real sandbox, ran
   print(2+2) and got 4, then tore the sandbox down.

4. Cost and risk. Built from our own MCP source, with no overlap; it unlocks the SDK
   superset the MCP server lacks (sessions, code execution, snapshots, volumes, full
   git, lifecycle). Keeps the MCP server. Open, cross-vendor format. Apache-2.0. No
   secrets in the repo.


Live demo, two minutes

1. Show the diagram (blog/diagram/cake.png): two layers, one goal.
2. In Claude Code, with DAYTONA_API_KEY set, type a natural request:
   "Run this untrusted Python — print(2+2) — in an isolated sandbox, show the output,
   then tear it down."
3. Narrate as it runs: Claude reports "Launching skill: daytona-sandbox," checks auth,
   creates a sandbox, returns 4, and destroys it.

Offline fallback (no key in the shell):
   python skills/daytona-sandbox/scripts/run_in_sandbox.py --code "print(2+2)"


Evidence

- healthcheck.py reached the Daytona control plane and reported READY.
- run_in_sandbox.py --code "print(2+2)" created a sandbox, returned 4, and destroyed it.
- run_in_sandbox.py --command ran Python 3.14 in the sandbox with shell chaining, then
  cleaned up.
- A headless Claude agent auto-triggered the Skill from a natural prompt, created sandbox
  79416419-87d1-402c-af45-dc1946f73d3d, ran print(2+2) to get 4, and destroyed it. Exit 0.


Anticipated questions

- Does it replace the MCP server? No. MCP is connectivity; the Skill is know-how. Ship both.
- Maintenance cost? Minimal. The MCP server already ships; the Skill is Markdown plus two
  small scripts over the SDK customers already use.
- Claude only? No. SKILL.md is an open format also read by Codex, Gemini CLI, Copilot, and Cursor.
- Security? Untrusted code runs with the network locked down, and the API key is read from
  the environment, never committed.


The ask

- Approve publishing the Skill and the "Skills vs MCPs" launch post.
- Later, optional: a lean remote MCP for surfaces that can't run a sandbox (web Claude,
  ChatGPT) — the one place a local Skill can't reach.

Repo: https://github.com/jiviny/daytona-skill
